---
layout: post
title: "How Do Solar Panels Work at Night?"
date: "2022-07-27T15:07:27+00:00"
author: killcreek
layout: post
featured: "false"
image: /assets/images/solar-at-night.jpeg
categories:
  - Solar
---

The short answer is no. Solar panels cannot produce power at night since they need sunlight to do it. The main sources of misinformation about solar panels operating at night are solar storage and having a nighttime backup power source.

We’ll discuss how net metering and using backup energy to power your home at night can make [solar panels still worth the investment](/top-benefits-of-installing-solar-panels-on-your-home/).

### **Can Solar Panels Make Energy at Night?**

In the same way that solar panels can’t function at their best when it’s cloudy, they can’t generate electricity at night when there isn’t any sunlight to capture.

To make sure you have enough electricity to run your home day and night, your solar panels work tirelessly from sunrise to sunset. However, to produce that power, the photovoltaic (PV) cells in your panels need sunshine.

Therefore, after the sun sets, it’s time to make use of any extra energy your system generated during the day. Your solar battery, which provides backup power for your home, can access this energy. If you don’t have a battery, you can use the solar credits you’ve accumulated through net metering as a source of power during the night.

Let’s examine each of these choices in more detail.

### **Compatible With Both Net Metering and Battery Storage**

The majority of solar panel owners link their solar installation to the grid in order to profit from net metering. Batteries are being installed for storage by households more frequently as well.

However, these two strategies can be combined; they are not mutually incompatible.

Fortunately, you can program your battery to only use the grid for electricity when it is completely empty. Alternately, you can set them up to operate simultaneously. By doing this, you can reduce your electricity costs and increase your energy security.

To find out how much solar energy you may possibly produce, check out our solar calculator.

**Related: [Ways You Can Save Energy During The Winter](/ways-you-can-save-energy-during-the-winter/)**

### **Energy Storage Using Solar Batteries at Night**

During the night, when solar panel energy production is at its lowest, solar batteries let you access electricity. Solar panels are an ever-present sustainable energy source because of backup power.

Anytime during the day, solar batteries can be used to access energy. But at night, when they [maximize the electricity generated by your solar panels](/how-much-power-can-a-solar-panel-generate/) throughout the day, they are most useful.

If you have a battery, your solar panels will charge it with any extra solar energy that isn’t used by your home for instantaneous electricity. So, rather than dumping extra electricity into the system, you may store it yourself for use at night or on a rainy day!

You now have the ability to use your solar battery storage before using the grid, giving you greater energy independence. Additionally, you can use stored energy other than simply at night.

For instance, if there is a power outage brought on by bad weather, such as a hurricane or periods of excessive heat or cold, you may rest easy knowing that you have enough energy to get you through the emergency.

### **You Can Stay Connected at Night With Net Metering**

The majority of utilities provide net metering systems. When you use net metering, any extra energy you don’t need to power your home is deposited into the grid, just like in a savings account. Your retail electric provider (REP) will compensate you or grant you solar credits in exchange.

You can use the energy credits that you’ve acquired while your solar panels were working hard during the day to power your home during the night. The majority of solar system owners have a large supply of credits that they can use as needed.

Net metering also features a two-way link that enables electricity to move both to and from your house. Overage energy generated by your solar panels throughout the day is fed into the grid. And when your solar panels aren’t producing during the night, energy from the grid enters your house.

In essence, a grid connection is a shared solar energy storage system. It isn’t accessible everywhere, though. Before making any long-term choices, such as purchasing a solar panel system or battery storage option, you should investigate the net metering regulations in your region.
